welcome to e2 talks it's a podcast where
we chat about the English language
landscape talking about topics relevant
to students like you in this podcast e
to experts Alex and Melinda talk about
their experience taking the IELTS the
computer-delivered version and the paper
delivered version in this candid chat
they talk about the pros and cons of
both tests and share their strategies
for success
enjoy
[Music]
welcome to this podcast all about our
experience with the IELTS test on the
computer and also the paper delivered
test my name is Alex and I'm the head of
IELTS here at e2 language comm and
joining me is Melinda Melinda is our
head of Pte hi Melinda hi how are you
Alex
great thank you now Melinda has just
done the paper-based test recently and I
did the computer delivered test a couple
of months ago now and so we're basically
going to compare our experiences and
talk about each section of the test
covering I guess the strategies that we
used the struggles that we faced and
also some of our suggestions and for
each part of the test Melinda if you're
happy too we'll also share our scores
eek okay let's see as we get to each
part malindo do you want to tell us a
little bit about yourself okay I've been
with E 2 for about 3 years and as you
said I'm head of um Pte and basically
I've been teaching for 100 years for a
very long time so I've actually had a
fair bit of experience teaching IELTS
and sometimes when I go I used to in
vigil 8 the IELTS test and that that
basically means that I was the person
that stood in the room and said stop
talking put your pen down do this do
that I was the bossy person at the front
so I've had a fit and I've been teaching
it for quite a number of years so had a
fair bit of experience with I else but
this is the first time I've ever
actually done it mmm me too this was my
first time doing the official test but
I've I've done I think every practice
test about 200 times while I finish and
I hope teacher and I'm also an IELTS
examiner in speaking and writing for a
number of years I think between us we've
got the test completely covered we also
write the content for the e2 materials
as well so I guess that covers our
preparation our preparation has been
teaching for the tests did you do any
special preparation before you actually
took it this time
no no I
remember though I mentioned to you that
I was going to do it and you asked me
that question and I said well no
actually I haven't had time and so you
gave me one piece of advice yes and your
one piece of advice was about the task
one writing and you told me to make sure
I had an overview so I did that
okay well hopefully that's reflected in
your score when we get to that section
and I guess the reason that we hey we
should cover why we took the test
luckily we didn't need it for migration
or anything like that but it was really
just for research purposes so I I had
worked in centers as you did where they
conducted the paper-based test and I was
curious to see how the computer
delivered tests differed from that so I
wanted to see their interface for the
whole test which is not available yet
online the IDP doesn't really make that
available and also I was just curious I
had been to an open night at the center
and it looked like it was a really
comfortable and nice environment so I
was yeah just curious interested pose
and part of being a teacher I guess is
to really experience it from the
candidates point of view and yeah I
think that's important so my motivations
were pretty much the same one other
motivation perhaps though was that
students often ask me should I do
PT e or should I do I else and my answer
has always been from a theoretical point
of view so to actually do the test is is
quite interesting it's given me a
different perspective did it change your
mind no not really
I had to have insight particulate into
the emotional roller coaster that I went
through and I imagine a lot of the
candidates went through during the test
if you want to talk about that now yeah
yeah let's talk about that the actual
day of the test how you felt in the
morning what you did what was the vibe
in the test Center and we're not sure if
we should mention where you took it but
it was somewhere in northern Australia
it was increase radius
I don't want to mention the exact center
yeah when I walked in in the morning I
wasn't sort of nervous it wasn't a heart
mistakes test for me as you said doing
it addicts of professional interest
really and so I was quite relaxed and I
was just chatting to other candidates
and for them it was high stakes they
were obviously little bit nervous so I
sort of tried to help them to relax a
little bit by just casual chat and yeah
I was in charge of the whole thing you
know no problem at all in charge of my
emotions and we still of standing in a
queue is a bit boring but hey Ian okay
yes you have to do that and I've gone
almost at the front of the queue or good
I didn't know what I was in this tune
and the next thing that happens is that
I get to the front go around the corner
and there's another queue and again I
didn't know what the queue was and this
happened about I think it was five times
I was in the queue and I didn't know why
I was in the skew what was happening
next and how far away I was from the
tests by the time I actually got to my
seat in the exam exam I was quite
irritated and annoyed I can't from this
is easy and comical to being quite
irritated why am i standing around him
in queues why am i being herded around
boy am I being told to be quiet I found
it really frustrating and I was just too
impatient and I saw I was wondering um
other students how do they feel about
this like the ones I spoke to was
putting on a brave face and obviously
didn't want to say I'm a nervous wreck
but that's how some of them kind of felt
it was an emotional roller coaster just
all this cueing and not knowing what was
going on do you think that sounds like a
frustrating start to the day do you
think it was a matter of no enough staff
or just poor communication well I have
to get it I think it was poor
communication but then it is difficult
they were 200 of us and how do you
communicate to 200 people without a loud
speaker and there's people everywhere
and part of it was that you come into
the building you've got to find your way
to the right place to find your way to
the cue and then you've got to put your
bags all the bits and bobs in a room and
so you've got to go through that process
and then we have to go up her a lift to
the fourth floor and this and obviously
200 people don't fit in one lift so
you're doing it you know a few of the
order time kind of
and then there's another queue for
registration and another one yes just I
was just really annoying maybe they
could have been signed saying why I was
queuing up and what for I don't know
what maybe I'd known I was just
expecting me find my seat sit down let's
start the test I'm ready
it wasn't my sounds very different to my
experience I think it was the total
opposite of that I should preface this
by saying I don't work for IDP but I
think they're gonna come off looking or
their test centers gonna come off
looking a lot better than the newer one
the test center here in Melbourne at
least I think that's a maximum of 24
candidates and there was a really nice
waiting room there was Jared was there
he said he thought he was going to a
yoga class there was quite music coming
out of the speakers and there was an
aromatherapy little video playing
telling us all about the tests the staff
was super friendly we did have to wage
that's that's still the case but there
were there were chairs and there was
something to watch on the screen people
still had their phones with them and
eventually we were put into a waiting
room which was also really comfortable
and then finally moved into the
assessment room with no speaking policy
but yeah it was it was very low stress
and I think everybody there felt pretty
conscious ting mmm so very different
okay yes very different what about when
you had to go into the test room and
there was no speaking for me that was
another frustrating thing because that
came after all of this standing and
waiting I don't know a while what's
happening and then we went into the exam
room and we had to sit with exam
conditions we had to sit in silence and
the test didn't start for another 25 30
minutes and there were people who'd been
in the room before me so they were
sitting there in silence for 40 minutes
and the people and the invigilator the
people at the front were saying no
speaking sit down be quiet
I said no speaking suddenly learn with
it you shouldn't have that bottling I
felt like I was in kindergarten or
something we're just all being told off
all the time yeah
I remember did you have to did you have
to wait that month I'm not sure how long
it was but it certainly didn't feel like
that but I have I have seen that sort of
atmosphere in other test centers I
noticed it but not in not in where I
took the test luckily but I think that's
something to be really conscious of as a
student that you might you may have to
wait for an hour or more and you need to
sort of adopt strategies to calm
yourself down so maybe some deep
breathing or meditation or just reciting
songs or something in your head to keep
yourself calm because you can't give in
to that stress and that frustration and
get off on the wrong foot yes so the
first side I think that's a really
important piece of advice how about the
first let's talk about the order of the
test because computer-delivered IELTS a
paper-based are different and I also
think Australia's paper deliver test is
different to around the world what was
the order of your test on paper I was
surprised by actually it was writing
first than reading listening and finally
speaking and that kind of surprised me
and it also meant to me immediately if I
finish the writing early I still got to
sit in the room I can't leave early so
by having the listening last we all
finished at the same time yes so it was
right reading listening speaking okay no
I don't think that that was changed a
few years ago so that's the Australian
order other countries I'm pretty sure
follow the order that I did on the
computer which was listening first then
listening then reading then writing and
speaking afterwards so did that throw
you off a bit expecting to start with
something different no if that had been
a high-stakes test for me it may well
have oh I think that I was flexible
enough because it's my first language
but if I've been doing the test in
another language aren't you may have
caused panic I don't know okay let's
talk about the reading test can you
remember the topics first of all it may
be some of the question types that you
got in that section yeah I can remember
my topics I wrote them down as soon as I
finished the exam actually the first one
was on goldner cuts in Australia and I
can't knew a little bit about that
already having gone to school in
Australia it's the sort of thing you
learn in primary school and there was
another one about learning from nature
and how our developments in technology
we can learn a lot from nature and there
was one which was a book review and it
was about a book that had been the topic
of the book that was being reviewed was
cities of the world and that was an
interesting one because there were two
perspectives in it there was what did
the original author say about this and
there was what did the reviewers say
about it so I think it would have been
easy to fall into the trap of answering
the question from the wrong person's
perspective so that was quite quite a
tricky text I thought quite a difficult
one yeah I'm quite uncommon I think I
think this is a bit of a new addition to
IELTS reading I'm in the more recent
practice books from Cambridge I have
seen a review or two but in the older
tests I think that text type wouldn't
have appeared so that's interesting to
note my topics were drumroll legumes
like beans and interestingly enough I
have well I've done a similar a similar
reading on a practice test and I
remember I remember feeling like that
was actually quite interesting and I
thought fairly dull topic but there was
there was some good questions in there
and there was also my second reading was
about something to do with psychology
and there was a name that I recognise
from other IELTS readings Daniel I think
it's Kahneman his surname he seems to be
an IELTS darling appears in a few ticks
and then the final reading was about
Mars and so I think we covered quite a
good spectrum of topics there it was
quite good actually I always known
theoretically the first test and the
first reading text should be easiest
there's one a little bit harder and the
last one should be much harder and yet
looking through the practice tests
they're not always like that but in my
test they were most certainly in that or
the first one easy last one really hard
in the middle one yes so so yeah also
like that as well ah I'm not sure that I
found them I didn't really feel like
they went in that order I've also heard
that that it goes from easy to difficult
but I agree in the practice test I feel
like it varies and maybe it comes down
at it to your background what you know
about what you're interested in and the
text type so there I think there is
usually a kind of an argumentative piece
or one written from a person's
perspective and some people tend to
struggle with that a little more than
the others but yeah I didn't I didn't
find a noticeable increase in difficulty
how about strategies was there anything
that you used or didn't use yeah
actually I used the strategy that we
teachers are always going on about when
telling students what strategies to use
and to be honest I don't always use it
and when I'm doing a test partly because
being a native speaker I can read and
understand with you I've got plenty of
time but this time I went in and I
specifically used that strategy and it
was really good strategy basically is
just look at that they're heading in any
graphics just to get a quick idea okay
it's about gold nuggets or it's about
kangaroos or it's about the Titanic
sinking whatever it is just what just a
little bit of information but then go
straight to the questions and I found
that really valuable so for example the
first one was about nuggets and when I
went through the questions I realized
that most of the questions were focused
on particular nuggets how big they were
when they were discovered and so the
organizational principle was the name of
the Nuggets so then when I went through
later and read the text I just
immediately underlined the names of the
Nuggets and that meant I could then go
to a question and quickly find where the
answer was and so we've been teaching a
really good strategy I found it really
useful and the last text as well it was
about
people's names yeah who said this was a
professor such-and-such a doctor
such-and-such one misses someone or
other
and so I underlined the names and then I
could very easily find the information
in the text and that helped me find
after 40 questions it helped me find
probably close to half of them really
quickly to find those answers mmm yeah I
use a combination of strategies that's
certainly one of them I also I look at
the question type and so if I see a
headings match or an information match
type question I tell myself ok I've got
to read everything cuz that type of
question doesn't reward skimming and
scanning it's more about careful reading
so when I see that type of question I
look at all the other questions and note
the keywords and then I go through
paragraph by paragraph so I start by
reading paragraph a and choose a heading
or choose a piece of information or two
and then at the same time I see if I can
answer the other questions I guess no
not given or some other kind of
classification so eventually I'd read
the whole text but I've read it only
once and I've answered all the surgeons
are you saying that you're doing the
questions out of order that you're sort
of doing the matching it but at the same
time you keep an eye on the true false
not given or whatever yeah yep
so if I have to read the paragraph to
match the heading I don't want to read
it again to do the next set of questions
so I try to just maximize my efficiency
and I found that really useful I also
sometimes get in a bit of a fluster when
I skip around a text if I jump around
scanning mhm sometimes I end up
frustrated and just read it anyway so
for me that step-by-step strategy is
quite effective doesn't work for
everyone but it's worth trying and
something we recommend in our live
classes quite a bit yeah and I think
it's a really good one - I would agree
with that and that's the value again of
reading through those questions first
because you know what you're looking for
so when you see it I saw a question
about that and it's yeah I agree with it
but one yet you reminded me actually
talking about true false not given in
matching I got
of those question types and they're my
least favorite question types as soon as
I see true false not given my hat sinks
or matching matching I just find boring
I can do it but you have to be
methodical you have to go through it and
really think carefully about it and be
able to rule answers in and out and true
false not given I've always always
always get stuck is it false
is it not given is that sometimes it's
clear at the times it's easy well
logically it should be this but and I
guess I'm second-guessing the person who
wrote the question what answer are they
expecting and so I get a little bit
thrown by truth or smoke even I think
they're evil yeah there there is a
balance there I think between really
thinking about the question and
overthinking the question you can you
can end up around in circles but I would
recommend Melinda that you watch my
video on YouTube before you miss okay we
talked about scores what did you score
in the reading well this is really
embarrassing because I know what you
score I got 8.5 and I think that means I
got at least two questions or is it just
at least one question wrong yeah
thirty-eight would be an 8 point 538 had
14 you know what nobody knows for sure
but it's probably 38 or 39 so maybe it
was just one true/false don't give him
that's what it was so I figure I got one
word two wrong but he's 8.5 doing so
many happy with that all right let's go
on to listening okay firstly let me ask
you about the logistics of that you said
you in a room with about 200 people how
was the audio quality and what were
other people sniffing and rustling
papers yeah Oh Dennis we were off what
we were treated like little little
children and the because we didn't have
hair on headsets there's just the audio
in the room and it was quite loud a
little bit too loud for me but hey it's
okay was in range
wasn't going to be deafening but the
person did the invigilator basically
said is it to land up if you think it's
too late but no one put their hands up
us to put your hand up if you think this
and then she did the same thing is it
too quiet
no I said put your hand up if it's too
hot and it's really bad I figure they
should have experience they should have
an idea of the volume it's good to give
us the opportunity to say I can't hear
it I guess but yeah it's just being
treated like little little children and
that's just my frustration and it's part
of I guess what you need to be prepared
for if you're doing the pen and paper
chest but yeah there was no distraction
from other people and the questions
begin and you just focused on listening
and reading listening and reading mm-hmm
okay so I guess I'm taking it on the
computer is less frustrating in that
regard that you have the headset and
you're able to adjust the volume as you
wish you can also adjust the size of the
text on the screen you can even adjust
the color of the text in the background
on the screen so it's quite delightful
yeah no distraction so I really enjoy
taking it and I spoke to I'm sorry to
interrupt I just I just thought of
something there was one guy that I spoke
to before the test here was an older
gentleman very nice from Lithuania and
he had a hearing problem and I noticed
in the test he was sitting way on the
other side of the room but I noticed
that he actually got an ear phone and he
got a headphone and so if people do have
a problem with hearing or if they're
stressed about it I think it's good at
some point to notify the invigilator
that you need assistance with that yeah
that's a great point actually and in
fact there if you're applying that would
be a special consideration and if
candidates do need to apply for that if
you have hearing problems or vision
problems or learning difficulties
something like that you you it's too
late on the day actually so he would
have organized that probably months in
advance they recommend booking I think
it's two months in advance
if you want to request special
considerations so anyone listening who's
thinking about make sure you plan well
in advance and find out what allowances
can be made you definitely don't be shy
actually do it if you need assistance
you need you should ask for and when we
talked after your test you said that you
had raced ahead yes I did something
really fun I got a number of very
foolish things in the test but one of
them was in the listening I think it was
questions 20 to 25 somewhere in that
part of the test and it was just one
section and they had gone through all of
the they've been discussion of all five
questions so I put in all five answers
and I was bored so I just turned the
page and I was reading the next
questions as I was reading the next
questions I wasn't quite sure but I
thought that I heard them say oh no no
not coffee
I mean tea something like that well you
think they're giving you an answer and
then they changed their minds later and
I wasn't quite sure and so I didn't know
should I change my answer shouldn't I
change my answer but if I had been doing
the right thing and listening and
focusing I would have caught it and I
would definitely have had had the right
answer I would have been confident but I
just lost a bit of confidence because
did she say that or not I don't know so
that the listen there for me was don't
race ahead don't be cocky and
overconfident do what you're told when
you talk hmm that's really interesting
because I would actually often tell
people to raise the hair to four to
check whenever you've got a bit of extra
time go to the link advisor yes proviso
that at that when they finish the
section they say one of two things you
probably know when it exactly exactly
they say it but they either say now you
have 30 seconds to check your answers or
they say now you have 30 seconds to read
the next five questions whatever it is
and when they give an instruction like
that I think you've got a choice you
don't need to check your answers if
you're confident just go ahead and read
the next part but you shouldn't be
reading and listening at the same
that's what I was doing and it was
really silly I see yeah you're right
when they say check your answers that's
exactly what I would say don't do that
read ahead turn to the next section and
on the computer I was curious to see
whether even if I was in section one
waiting for section one to start was I
able to click through and look at
section 4 which I was so every chance I
got I moved particularly to section 3 &
4 which are the more difficult ones I
used those gaps in part 1 and 2 to just
look through them through and see what
the topic was what type of questions
particularly looking for a multiple
choice which have so much text in them
so yeah yeah that's interesting yeah I
found the listening fairly easy I must
say there was but there's one question I
think that I second-guessed myself but
otherwise I felt that I was very well
prepared I knew exactly what to expect
in part 1 2 3 4 it always follows the
same system which we cover just
endlessly in our life classes and so
there were no surprises and I think that
would be a something for people to be
aware of you for example you're always
going to hear a lecture in part 4 it's
almost always going to be a gap field
type of question and it's an academic
context I think that kind of information
it's it's gonna really help you out on
test day yeah I thought the same thing
that it went as expected and the only
thing that didn't go right was me
reading ahead and my scoring that you're
about to ask so I'll tell you anyway 8.5
and it was probably because I made a
mistake that one question that I wasn't
listening to probably you see your
school oh I got 9 in Wow thankfully yeah
I was yes I said there was one that I
wasn't sure but everything else I was I
was certain about and yeah the
computer-based listening I was a little
anxious about because I'm a big
note-taker when I do practice this oh
and when I listen to
anything if it's important I always take
notes or write or at least draw a
picture or something so I was worried
about being a passive listener but you
can highlight on the screen and you also
get a pen and paper so I felt like I was
very engaged I wasn't just sitting
looking at the screen as I was worried I
might I should say that about reading as
well sorry I should mention that about
reading that there's also the ability to
highlight on the screen and take notes
on the screen which I found a real
lifesaver I could find my place really
easily as I jumped between questions and
text so you could actually type in a
scribble pad somewhere oh yeah yeah
there's a little option on the screen
where you can open up a notepad and time
I didn't use that I did write a bit of
stuff on my piece of paper but I was
highlighting all over the place so you
can highlight in the questions and in
the text and I use that that feature of
what really helped me yeah it's really
good for students to know that that's
possible that they can annotate they can
highlight and write notes it's great on
to writing the nemesises yes my score
was okay but I was very very lucky to
get that school I I did something really
foolish oh that was just technically
technically I was lucky I did yeah
should I tell the story yeah tell us
about that good for everyone to learn
from your era right yes at the beginning
like writing was the first task and I
was bored and angry by the time that it
started because we'd been waiting and
waiting in silence being treated like
kids anyway so that and I thought at one
stage I think heavens it's starting
finally we can get started I'm ready
let's go and then she started giving
instructions and my eye is just not
literally but virtually rolled in my
hair dusty come on Lady she was going on
about how
the task one write on paper has a blue
line across the top and it's got task 1
written on it the task to write in paper
has a red line
it's got task 2 written on it so don't
make the mistake of writing on the wrong
paper and I was thinking oh come on
when can we start this thing anyway we
were able to start it we got started I
wrote my task 1 paper and then seven or
eight minutes finished you native
speaker it's it's not I've got an unfair
advantage obviously when I finished my
paper about to start the task and I
suddenly realized I'd written my task
one paper you say on the Tusk - paper so
then I had to put my hand up and tell
them what I'd done it where should i
what should I do about my task
- should I write that on the task 1 or
should I write get another piece of
paper and they told me to write it on
the task 1 I had to cross it off and
label things and embarrassing and it got
even sillier because I needed another
piece of paper filled both sides of my
task - I needed another one so that -
invigilator x' had to have a little
conference about should they're giving
me the red paper or the blue paper and
somehow amused by it and half mean half
clean barest bringing this sort of went
on and then it was compounded at the end
when they're collected the papers
because all of the red ones had to be
collected together all of the blue ones
had to be collected together it meant my
task to went in the task one pile sorry
my task one went in at us - if I might
ask one was split between task one and
task two and so then I was live thinking
how are they going to mark this is this
going to go
is the person writing the task marking
the task 1 are they going to get my task
to paper the person writing the task -
are they going to get half of each and
so I imagined I was going to get 4.5 for
writing because of my ceiling stick so
that's fairly stressful feeling
embarrassing and partly amusing you
thought was able to laugh at myself like
the most impatient IELTS candidate there
ever was I think I could be I might just
be that looks like somebody must have
fixed that up before it went to the
examiners I guess I think that would
have loaded it into the into a computer
system because it gets sent off to
remote markers right yes yeah yes so
somebody did the right thing and helped
me get the mark that I must have earned
yeah well you scored very well so we
ended up getting the same score which
was 98.5 but I must confess that I
actually scored an 8 and then I sent it
off for remarking because I was so
furious and thought that I deserved an O
and of course but it came back is 8.5 so
that that was good I still would would
like most people I would like to have a
look at the criteria and see where the
examiner disagreed with me but I think
everybody Jarrod's had the same
experience when your English teacher
tests expert I guess you expect to get a
certain score but you see you know it
just happens in the rising and in the
speaking there is a little room for
subjectivity unfortunately no matter how
rigorous their standards are but I think
coming off that now when people ask me
about challenging their score
particularly those who are on 6.5 and
need seven or 7.5 and need 8 I feel like
if you can afford it I would always take
that option I know so many people who
score has gone up including me including
Jared several time his score several
times rather his score has increased so
it's not it's not a good theme for a
test to have to do that or to have to
offer that but it seems like that's
definitely a very good option for people
so would you recommend that to everyone
or just to people who think that they
should have done better there previously
they've done better or their teacher or
someone what they were expecting a
certain score and they got below oh yeah
yeah I think I'd up everyone
no not for everyone you're right I think
if you've if you're just taking the test
over and over and over and you're
scoring the same thing then that's then
that is a good reflection of the test
it's giving you the score for a ray
but if you let's say you did get 6.5 in
a new tea a few months worth of work and
you worked you know with a teacher and
you got feedback on your writing and
you've you felt like you've made
improvements you know that you you're
better than you were then in that case I
would go for it yeah but um it's not an
yeah but and particularly if you've just
missed your school by half a mark or
something yeah I could just below what
you need for immigration or entering
your master's course whatever it is if
you just below and you think you should
have scored higher exactly yeah point
five with it how does that yeah how does
that work you pay the money and if they
140 dollars oh it's 107 maybe 176
something like that over a hundred
seventy and Wow and if they change your
school you get that refund yep if your
score goes up you get your money back so
yeah it was funny actually the day we
Jared and I had both challenge that we
saw in the in our bank accounts that
money had come back that was good um we
just talk quickly about the topic so I
had in my task one a couple of lying
graphs talking about the past to the
future which is some almost exactly the
topic that we have in one of our live
classes actually yeah so I I just dealt
with that in the same way as we we teach
in our classes and in our course
materials my task to was about job
interviews and it was a and agree
disagree essay about whether job
interviews are a reliable judge of a
person when they're applying for a
position in a large company how about
you yeah I had done back right there at
us one was Barbara's to back reps and
there was a lot of information so it was
one of those ones where you just have to
select a few things to talk about so the
first one was male and female students
enrolled in science courses Eddie
versity comparing two different years
that 1972 9 2012 something like that and
then the second one was about the number
of enrollments in three different
science subjects so there was a lot of
information there and it was one of
those ones you couldn't possibly talk
about everything
you just had to select a few things a
few key things and work with those tasks
to was reasonably straightforward it was
problems solution was talking about our
increasing consumption of consumer goods
and that's degrading the environment and
the question was why is that the case
and what can we do about it so it's a
classic problem solution it was quite
easy to address in a fairly structured
and methodical way mm-hmm so I know you
mentioned your trouble with the answer
sheets which one to rise on what about
physically did you find it
a strain - right - hands right the
amount that you had - and also did you
count your words or were you conscious
of your word count as you were reading
yeah I did I'm not literally counting I
counted my words one way is to sort of
to count across and say there's eight
words on the line and I've done ten
lines therefore 80 words but I actually
went one two three four five all the way
through and when I got to the limit then
it was fighting when I sort of knew how
many words I had on the page yes sir I
do literally count the words that's
another benefit of the computer there's
a word count on the screen which is such
a huge yeah you can also copy and paste
and you say there's an hour ticking away
on the screen but you can swap between
task one and task 2 so I actually
started with task 2 which is what we
advise people to do so that I didn't
spend too long on task 1 and then came
back to task 1 - within I think 20
minutes yeah that was interesting like I
could look around the room and see the
other in 199 candidates and a lot of
them did that a lot of them actually did
their task unless they all made a
mistake as me a lot of them started with
their task to paper hmm yeah I think it
was I think was good I actually wasn't
sure if I would
top that strategy but I think it was it
was really good it saves you from
spending too much time on task one which
is very tempting once you get buried in
it
and let's finish with the speaking test
which is regardless of whether you're
doing computer delivered or paper
delivered it's the same thing it's still
one on one with an examiner can you
remember what your topics were yes and
they were all unusual I said earlier
that I've been teaching it for a very
long time all of these topics were new
to me which was really interesting and
the part one there a few different
topics so they were talking about some
jobs and then they talked about a few
questions about haircuts and hairdos and
one about a few questions actually about
jeans and then the part two was about
the night sky and the stars I had to
speak for two minutes about the night
sky in stones and then the part three
questions were related to that of course
so it was stars and children's
imagination and stars and their
importance to people is their importance
waning reducing in society so there were
all very different topics quite
interesting hmm yeah good range my one
so at the start of part one of speaking
always begins with either what you do
work or study or where you live and I
was asked about where I live and then
questions about how I get to work and
the other set of questions was all about
handwriting and my part two and three
were all about intelligence so part one
I saw part two I had to talk about
someone I know who is intelligent and so
I just gathered all the most interesting
information I could about a variety of
people that I know and created a mega
mix of them so it was probably 50% made
up and 50% real and I tried to go
through use the PPF method I talked
about the past I talked about the
present and about the future including
this one person so they're speaking I
found it actually felt quite nervous
beforehand I felt a bit silly and having
been an examiner I know that
it's awkward when you're interviewing a
native speaker because often often the
native speakers overconfident and they
don't produce enough language and so
halfway through the interview sometimes
I used to feel like oh god I wish this
person had looked up a bit of
information about the test like they're
doing really badly because he really
can't score someone a nine on vocab and
grammar if they don't produce a wide
range I have to demonstrate it yes so I
was very conscious of that and giving
very elaborate extravagant answers even
two simple questions to try and boost my
score and I think we both did a good job
in the speaking yes yes I can proudly
say I've got a nine for that one me too
when strategy I think's really important
though is to actually in the two-minute
term in the second part to actually take
some notes you've got a minute to do it
and you should write down some things
just in case you go blank or I find it a
really good strategy and I would
encourage anyone to just write down a
few different ideas if you get stuck you
can say oh another thing that reminds me
of is and go off on slightly different
tangent mm-hmm yeah I agree I write down
I think I actually wrote down a few bits
of vocabulary that I wanted to make sure
I produced some exactly yeah advise
people to do that sometimes as well if
you've got a few pet words that you want
to remember to include Patsy's the place
to do it because you've got that time to
prepare for it whereas part one and
three you might not get the opportunity
to to use your big guns right but you do
need to make sure that you're still
relevant to the topic or oh yeah if
you're not just using the words for the
words sake they need to fit in there
yeah that's a bit of a dangerous one
okay yeah I get that word like
inevitable is a word that you can kind
of get into any situations there are a
few words like that but there's power
words but yeah inevitably an opportunity
exactly because you can always say well
it's not inevitable it's just possible
yes and so the
test overall it seems like a
computer-based experience was certainly
seems like much less stressful much less
yelling what's going on than what you
experienced and what I've experienced in
test centers but having said that each
each test center is different from each
other and the individual leaders have a
different style and so I guess what
would you recommend to students
regardless of where they're preparing
what a what are some of the takeaways
from your exam
well my exam was what surprised me most
was my emotions going into it from being
quite relaxed to being agitated
irritated annoyed angry embarrassed
mused I've just this range of emotions I
went through and I hadn't really
expected that I kind of thought I'd be
hey cool calm all the way through the
test do you think that affected your
performance that's definitely why I lost
my house and probably didn't but if it
had been a high-stakes testing it in
something that wasn't my first language
and I'd paid all that money for it I
think yes it could have I could have
really talked myself into a down into a
spiral this is hopeless I'm gonna do
terribly at this I could easily have
done that and I suspect that some
students do do that yeah I think and you
know that is talking themselves down
yeah absolutely I think I mean anxiety
is gonna come into it and stress and
start thinking about what's riding on
this test
perhaps your experience of getting
irritable is is a classic native speaker
or expert speaker reaction where you and
often people feel like well why do I
have to be here I know I know how to
speak English but you know at the end of
the day it's a box that has to be ticked
for some people for Migration National
Registration and regardless of how
annoying it is your good job is to do
your best on the day present your best
language I guess and try to keep that in
mind as you prepare for the test as well
it's not the it's not the best fun in
the world taking the language test
yeah the other thing is it will end if
you're not going to be sitting in that
test for the rest of your life feeling
that it's going to end
you can walk out into the street and
breathe fresh air yeah yeah I think a
lot of it a lot of the test preparation
is really that mental game and to some
extent all said stamina like sitting
there for three plus hours and
concentrating is I mean I can't remember
the last time I did that I can barely
read two pages of the book without
checking my phone or turning on the TV
so part of preparation is training
yourself to concentrate for big
stretches of time and I've found really
helpful with a lot of positive thinking
I think I told you when I was doing
before the reading test I tell myself
I'm so excited to read about link um for
whatever it is or I can't wait to see
what's on this test and I try to
mentally check myself and same with the
writing I think to myself this is
exciting what am I gonna what am I going
to talk about or write about today and
also just sitting up and taking some big
deep breaths was helpful because you can
really find yourself in a funk after an
hour or two yes yes so you're kind of
making a game of it and the alternative
to making a game of it the bad
alternative is to think my whole life
depends on this if I don't get the score
I need I'm not going to be able to
immigrate to wherever I want to
immigrate to everything rests on this
it's I'm going to have to tell my family
that I failed again you could go in with
that mindset compared to the mindset you
were talking about where this is fun I'm
going to enjoy this it's I think it's
going to affect your overall score your
overall outcome your stamina your
ability to realize you've made a mistake
you could begin to speaking for example
even if you've just said something silly
the strategy is to keep going not to sit
not to panic because you've made a
mistake and really focus on that just
keep going yeah do your best in the rest
of it yeah and I think that positive
mindset also it comes from preparation
I'm sure everyone listening to this and
our student City - they're preparing
they're working hard now before the test
and
the more preparation you do the more
that you could turn up to that test
center and you you know exactly what to
expect on each part of the test then
they're more confident the more relaxed
you can be if you arrive and you don't
even know what's coming up in listening
part three for example everything's a
surprise not always a good one so I
think yeah preparation is key the more
that you can get under your belt in the
lead-up to your test and as you said
just like the test is going to end the
test preparation is going to end as well
eventually you get that score and you
can go back to Netflix and playing on
your phone but for a couple of months
you know it's really worth the
investment to get across the test and do
as much practice as you can yeah
absolutely I completely agree with it
and there they will come a day when you
might know what to do with yourself
because you no longer have to study for
that test been there and done it you can
always pop into our live classes and
just just hang out yeah encourage a few
other people so do you have a verdict on
IELTS versus Peter you or perhaps that's
for another podcast another day well I
would say absolutely Pte however I'm
comparing Pte which is computer-based to
pen and paper I else I think my
experience of Pte is probably more
similar to your computer-based
i--once although there was no
aromatherapy and soft recommend every
test centre to invest in that for those
who are preparing for PCA they can find
you in the e2 Pte course is that right
Melinda yes they'll find me there or
they'll find evidence of my work because
I've done a lot of the writing and
design for that course yes again if
you're preparing for IELTS you probably
catch me in life classes or you know of
course materials as well I would just
back up what you were saying before Alex
about making sure that if you're sitting
the test in the next few months you're
spending a lot of your time online
probably at a two
make sure that you're doing the study
that you understand each part of that
test and you know exactly what's coming
up that's going to be your best chance
of doing them yep great advice and write
your answer on the correct answer sheets
thank you for joining us really good
we'll see you again soon
no pleasure it looks nice to check
thanks for listening to e to talks
remember to check out ET language comm
for IELTS courses and e to school comm
for general english language learning
thanks